Doc and repo cleanup (#213)
jondavid-black/AaC: docs/docs/dev_guide/index.md

---
layout: default
title: AaC Developer's Guide
nav_order: 2
has_children: true
permalink: docs/dev_guide
---

# Getting started

## Gitpod Environment
This project prioritizes supporting accessible, reproduceable, and easy to use development environments which is why we support and recommend users use the already-curated [Gitpod](https://www.gitpod.io/) Architecture-as-Code development environment. In fact, you can open a Gitpod instance right now by clicking this link: https://Gitpod.io/#https://github.com/jondavid-black/AaC. The Gitpod environment handles all the setup and configuration necessary to begin developing AaC. You can immediately open a vscode workspace file and begin debugging the Python and Typescript applications.

> If it's your first time using Gitpod, you'll be prompted to make an account or use SSO provided by gitlab and github. Gitpod provides a free tier, so you're not required to pay before using it.

Author: ```suggestion
If it's your first time using Gitpod, you'll be prompted to make an account or use SSO provided by Gitlab and Github. Gitpod provides a free tier, so you're not required to pay before using it.
```

Gitpod provides the ability to initialize the environment with shell commands and scripts. We leverage these init commands to prime a development environment (terminal) for the AaC Python package and the AaC VSCode Extension (Typescript). You can find the init commands in the `.Gitpod.yml` file at the root of the repository.

## Non-Gitpod Environment

### Requirements

> There are some development requirements for developing with AaC. The always up-to-date source of truth for requirements will be the `.gitpod.Dockerfile` at the root of the AaC repository.

Author: ```suggestion
There are some developmental and system requirements for developing with AaC. The always up-to-date source of truth for requirements will be the `.gitpod.Dockerfile` at the root of the AaC repository.
```

```

Install the AaC package in development mode:
```bash
pip install -e .[all]
```

Run the AaC `version` command to confirm the package is installed:
```bash
aac version
```

<br>

#### AaC Python Package Dependency Control
For more fine-grained control when installing dependencies, they have been structured into 3 sections:
- runtime - the dependencies required to run the project
- test - the dependencies required to run the project's automated tests
- dev - the dependencies required to run development tools like linting and quality checks

To install only runtime dependencies simply use pip to install the dependencies:
```bash
$ pip install -e .
```

If you'd like to install the additional dependencies (test and dev), then you can specify that pip include those dependencies like such:

To install test dependencies (test), run this:
```bash
$ pip install -e .[test]
```

To install development dependencies (dev), run this:
```bash
$ pip install -e .[dev]
```

To install all dependencies (runtime, dev, and test), run this:
```bash
$ pip install -e .[all]
```

### Running the AaC VSCode Extension
The Typescript VSCode Extension can be run by

## VSCode Workspaces

> Because this repository houses both a Python and TypeScript project, we're using [VSCode Workspaces](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/workspaces) to separate and present two different projects and experiences. When you first open the project in VSCode, you will see the entirety of it, however, if you open say the python workspace then the VSCode instance will reload and now the visible files, IDE configuration, and the configured tasks are all pertaining to the python package. The same is true for the vscode_extension workspace and its configuration for TypeScript.

Author: ```suggestion
Because this repository houses both a Python and TypeScript project, we're using [VSCode Workspaces](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/workspaces) to separate and present two different projects and experiences. When you first open the project in VSCode, you will see the entirety of it, however, if you open say the python workspace then the VSCode instance will reload and now the visible files, IDE configuration, and the configured tasks will now pertain only to the python package. The same is true for the vscode_extension workspace and its TypeScript configuration.
```

You can open a workspace in VSCode by:
1. Hitting the `f1` key
2. When prompted, type `Open Workspace From File`
3. When presented with a filepath, enter:
    - /workspace/AaC/.vscode/python.code-workspace
    - /workspace/AaC/.vscode/vscode_extension.code-workspace
4. Press the `Ok` button and watch the IDE switch workspaces.

> ## Testing

Author: This is Python testing and should be in the python section.

To run tests, make sure you've set up your dependencies using `pip install -e .[test]` or `pip install -e .[all]`. Then, from the root of the python project, run the following shell command (from within your virtual environment).

```bash
$ tox
```

### VSCode Unit Test Support

> The python plugin for VSCode supports the `unittest` python library, and not the nose2 framework that we use. The impact is fairly minimal, but python unit tests using the nose2 parameterized tests will not run correctly from within the VSCode IDE since it fails to recognize the nose2 parameterized tests as parameterized tests causing them to fail.

Author: Add a note that this is for Python and VSCode Test support

You can open a workspace in VSCode by:
1. Hitting the `f1` key
2. When prompted, type `Open Workspace From File`
3. When presented with a filepath, enter:
    - /workspace/AaC/.vscode/python.code-workspace
    - /workspace/AaC/.vscode/vscode_extension.code-workspace
4. Press the `Ok` button and watch the IDE switch workspaces.
---

## Gitpod Environment
This project prioritizes supporting accessible, reproduceable, and easy to use development environments which is why we support and recommend users use the already-curated [Gitpod](https://www.gitpod.io/) Architecture-as-Code development environment. In fact, you can open a Gitpod instance right now by clicking this link: https://Gitpod.io/#https://github.com/jondavid-black/AaC. The Gitpod environment handles all the setup and configuration necessary to begin developing AaC. You can immediately open a vscode workspace file and begin debugging the Python and Typescript applications.

If it's your first time using Gitpod, you'll be prompted to make an account or use SSO provided by Gitlab and Github. Gitpod provides a free tier, so you're not required to pay before using it.

> Gitpod provides the ability to initialize the environment with shell commands and scripts. We leverage these init commands to prime a development environment (terminal) for the AaC Python package and the AaC VSCode Extension (Typescript). You can find the init commands in the `.Gitpod.yml` file at the root of the repository.

Author: Good call out

> Gitpod provides the ability to initialize the environment with shell commands and scripts. We leverage these init commands to prime a development environment (terminal) for the AaC Python package and the AaC VSCode Extension (Typescript). You can find the init commands in the `.Gitpod.yml` file at the root of the repository.

Author: Poor choice of words, I've tried to reword for clarity.

## Non-Gitpod Environment

### Requirements
There are some developmental and system requirements for developing with AaC. The always up-to-date source of truth for requirements will be the `.gitpod.Dockerfile` at the root of the AaC repository.
* Python 3.9+ Installed

> * Typescript Dependencies

Author: Those are required for Linux environments. We should update this to specify that. 

Did you need to install any packages to develop the VSCode Extension locally?

> * Typescript Dependencies

Author: I updated these requirements to be linux-specific

    * libnss3-dev
    * libgbm-dev

### Developing the AaC Python Package
The AaC python package, its source code, and its configuration are all found in the `python/` directory.

#### Installing AaC Python Package
We expect python developers to use a virtual environment when developing the AaC package, and so the project is configured only for use with virtual environments.

Create a new environment:
```bash

> python3.9 -m venv venv --system-site-packages

Author: System site package pertains to any development happening inside a containerized development environment, not necessarily Gitpod. I'll take a note to see if we can get away from using that flag in containerized environments.

> python3.9 -m venv venv --system-site-packages

Reviewer: Alternatively, we could just say to use it in containerized environments and not when developing outside of a containerized environment.

```

Configure your shell with the virtual environment:
```bash
source venv/bin/activate
```

Install the AaC package in development mode:
```bash
pip install -e .[all]
```

Run the AaC `version` command to confirm the package is installed:
```bash
aac version
```

<br>

#### AaC Python Package Dependency Control
For more fine-grained control when installing dependencies, they have been structured into 3 sections:
- runtime - the dependencies required to run the project
- test - the dependencies required to run the project's automated tests
- dev - the dependencies required to run development tools like linting and quality checks

To install only runtime dependencies simply use pip to install the dependencies:
```bash

> $ pip install -e .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pip install -e .
```

```

If you'd like to install the additional dependencies (test and dev), then you can specify that pip include those dependencies like such:

To install test dependencies (test), run this:
```bash

> $ pip install -e .[test]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pip install -e .[test]
```

```

To install development dependencies (dev), run this:
```bash

> $ pip install -e .[dev]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pip install -e .[dev]
```

```

To install all dependencies (runtime, dev, and test), run this:
```bash

> $ pip install -e .[all]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pip install -e .[all]
```

```

#### Testing the Python Package
To run tests, make sure you've set up your dependencies using `pip install -e .[test]` or `pip install -e .[all]`. Then, from the root of the python project, run the following shell command (from within your virtual environment).

```bash
$ tox
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Additionally, to get an HTML code coverage report, update the `tox` command to include the following flags: `tox -- --coverage-report html`

```

#### VSCode Unit Test Support for Python

> The python plugin for VSCode supports the `unittest` python library, and not the nose2 framework that we use. The impact is fairly minimal, but python unit tests using the nose2 parameterized tests will not run correctly from within the VSCode IDE since it fails to recognize the nose2 parameterized tests as parameterized tests causing them to fail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The python plugin for VSCode supports the `unittest` python library, and not the `nose2` framework that we use. The impact is fairly minimal, but python unit tests using the `nose2` parameterized test feature will not run correctly from within the VSCode IDE since it fails to recognize the `nose2` parameterized tests as parameterized tests, they will fail.

To get around this, you can run all the tests from the terminal using the above `tox` commands.
```

Author: Tiny edit. How about this?
```suggestion
The python plugin for VSCode supports the `unittest` python library, and not the `nose2` framework that we use. The impact is fairly minimal, but python unit tests using the `nose2` parameterized test feature will not run correctly from within the VSCode IDE since it fails to recognize the `nose2` parameterized tests as parameterized tests causing them to fail.
	
To get around this, you can run all the tests from the terminal using the above `tox` commands.
```

### Developing the AaC TypeScript VSCode Extension
The TypeScript AaC VSCode Extension, its source code, and its configuration are all found in the `vscode_extension/` directory.

#### Installing & Building the AaC VSCode Extension

> The Typescript VSCode Extension can be installed by running:

Reviewer: Does `yarn compile` actually install the extension? I thought it just built it.

```suggestion
The TypeScript VSCode Extension can be installed by running:
```
